## README

## MVP2 Path A

The purpose of the proposed MVP2 Path A workflow query is to leverage causal activity models (CAMs) as a source of mechanistic insights to explain clinical observations. The basic idea is to create multi-hop MVP2 queries that call both the clinical KPs and cam-kp. The initial focus is on two-hop queries, with the first hop asking for clinical observations from the clinical KPs (icees-kg, cohd, multiomics-ehr-risk-kp) and the second hop asking for biological mechanisms from cam-kp to explain those observations. The demonstration query asks for chemical entities associated with disease diagnoses in the real world and then asks for genes or gene products that are affected by those chemicals. This example may seem simplistic and not terribly novel; however, cam-kp contains CAM representations that provide mini-KGs or networks of annotations that together provide a more complete model of biological function than the separate annotations (e.g., a network of how different gene products work together in a biological pathway). _Caveat: cam-kp currently does not support Biolink qualifiers, but the service is expected to do so after implementing a fix within the next week or two._

Note that the demonstration query, while valid TRAPI, does not return results when sent to the WFR, due to timeout issues, even when Aragorn, icees-kg, and cam-kp are specifically targeted. Max W. was able to run the query only because he "tuned" Aragorn from behind-the-scenes. When sent directly to Aragorn with an extended timeout, the query returns a 16.6MB response, with >12k results in total. icees-kg took 35 seconds to respond to the first hop (normal timeout is 10s) and returned 106 results, and then cam-kp took 90 seconds to respond to the second hop with the 12k results. As with the MVP1 workflow queries, this proposed CQS MVP2 workflow query may need to rely on caching within Aragorn in order to contribute to Translator MVP2 queries.
